=head1 NAME

nbdkit-ones-plugin - nbdkit plugin filled with repeated 0xff or other bytes

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit ones [[size=]SIZE] [byte=N]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-ones-plugin> is a plugin for L<nbdkit(1)>.  Any read returns
a repeating pattern of C<0xff> (all ones) bytes, or another repeating
byte if you use the C<byte> parameter.  Everything written to the
virtual device is discarded.

Most NBD consumers will be very confused by this device.  It is mainly
useful for testing.  L<nbdkit-data-plugin(1)> can be used to create a
modifiable RAM disk initialized with fixed data.

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<byte=>N

Set the repeating byte to C<N>.  The default is C<0xff> (all ones).

Instead of C<byte=0> it is more efficient to use
L<nbdkit-null-plugin(1)>.

=item [B<size=>]SIZE

Specify the virtual size of the disk image.

This parameter is optional.  If omitted then a zero-sized device is
created.

C<size=> is a magic config key and may be omitted in most cases.
See L<nbdkit(1)/Magic parameters>.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$plugindir/nbdkit-ones-plugin.so>

The plugin.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$plugindir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-ones-plugin> first appeared in nbdkit 1.36.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<nbdkit-data-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-full-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-null-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-pattern-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-random-plugin(1)>.
L<nbdkit-sparse-random-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-zero-plugin(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright Red Hat
